Compost or other organic matter, such as leaves or aged manure, is the best way to improve your soil's texture while also adding nutrients. Compost is a great addition to all types of soils. It improves the drainage in heavy clay soils and helps overly sandy soils retain more moisture. Experts at Utah State University Cooperative Extension recommend incorporating 2 to 4 inches of composted organic matter before planting sweet corn. Compost is especially important if you have heavy clay soil, because corn requires well-drained soil to grow healthily.

Pre-Planting Fertilizer
Sweet corn requires plenty of nitrogen and phosphorus throughout the growing season. Many soils already contain enough potassium, magnesium and other nutrients for corn to grow healthily. An all-purpose fertilizer containing more nitrogen and phosphorus than potassium -- such as a 16-16-8 ratio fertilizer -- helps ensure healthy growth when applied to the soil before planting. Experts at Utah State University Extension recommend applying 2 pounds of 16-16-8 ratio fertilizer for every 100 square feet of planting area. If you know you have soil with less potassium, you can apply a more balanced fertilizer, such as a 12-12-12 ratio.


 
pH Adjustments
Corn grows best in soil with a pH between 5.8 and 6.5. You an use at-home soil testing strips to reveal your soil's pH. Add lime to raise the soil pH or add sulfur to lower it as needed. Different soil additives come with different concentrations, so follow manufacturer's instructions regarding how much to apply to alter the soil pH by a specific amount.

Post-Planting Side Dressing
A side-dressing of fertilizer containing nitrogen -- such as a 46-0-0 ratio fertilizer -- will help corn continue to grow well after it sprouts and uses up some of the soil's nitrogen. To side-dress sweet corn, sprinkle the fertilizer on the surface of the soil 6 inches to the side of the rows of corn and water it in. Utah State University Cooperative extension recommends 1/2 pound of 46-0-0 fertilizer per 100 square feet when plants develop eight to 10 leaves. You can apply another 1/4 pound of fertilizer when corn stalks begin to develop silks or when they have 10 to 12 leaves.

